### Today's Objective
- Finish 14.8
	- Differentiability
	- Examples

## 14.8 Differentiability
>💡When can you differentiate?

**Recall**: $f(x)$ is differentiable when
$$\begin{align}
f'(a)&=\lim_{ h \to 0 } \frac{f(a-h)-f(a)}{h} \\[3pt]
f'(a)&\approx \frac{f(a+h)-f(a)}{h} \\[3pt]
f(a+h)-f(a)&=f'(a)h+E(h)
\end{align}$$
exists.
>💡Equivalently, $f$ is differentiable if $\displaystyle\frac{E(h)}{h}\to 0$ as $h\to 0$.
### 2D Variable
$f(x,y)$ is differentiable at $(a,b)$
if there exists a linear function 
such that if the error $E(x,y)$ is defined by
$$f(x,y) = L(x,y) + E(x,y)$$
and $h=x-a$, $k=y-b$, then the relative error $\displaystyle\frac{E(a+h,b+k)}{\sqrt{ h^2+k^{2 }}}$ satisfies
$$\lim_{\substack{h \to 0 \\ k \to 0}} \frac{E(a+h,b+k)}{ h^2+k^{2 }}=0$$
$f$ is differentiable in a region $\mathbb{R}$ if it is differentiable for every point in $\mathbb{R}$. 

### Example 1
$$f(x,y)=\sqrt{(x+1)^2 +y^2}$$
List all points, if any, at which $f$ is **not** differentiable.
#### Solution
We compute
$$\begin{align}
f_{x}=\frac{1}{2\sqrt{ (x+1)^{2} +y^{2}}}\cdot 2(x+1)&=\frac{x+1}{2\sqrt{ (x+1)^{2} +y^{2}}} \\[3pt]
f_{y}=\frac{1}{2\sqrt{ (x+1)^{2} +y^{2}}}\cdot 2y&=\frac{y}{\sqrt{ (x+1)^2 +y^2}}
\end{align}\displaystyle $$
$f_{x}$ and $f_{y}$ are undefined at points $(a,b)=(-1, 0)$
Conclude: $f_{x}(1,0)$ does not exist. Hence, $f$ is not differentiable at $(-1,0)$
> 💡if $f_{x}$, $f_{y}$ both exist, is $f$ differentiable?

### Example 2
$$f(x,y)=\sqrt{ xy }$$
(a) Show the partial derivatives exist at $(0, 0)$
(b) Show that $f$ is not differentiable at $(0, 0)$
#### Solution
(a) 
$$
\begin{align}
f_{x}(x,y)&=\frac{1}{2}\cdot \frac{1}{\sqrt{ xy }}\cdot y=\frac{y}{2\sqrt{ xy }} \\[3pt]
f_{x}(0,0)&=\lim_{ h \to0 }\frac{f(h,0)-f(0,0)}{h}= \lim_{ h \to0 }\frac{0-0}{h}=\lim_{ h \to 0 }0=0  \\[3pt]
f_{y}(0,0) &= 0
\end{align}
$$
Hence, $f_{x}(0,0), f_{y}(0,0)$ both exist.
(b) Consider $\displaystyle \vec{u}=\frac{\vec{i}}{\sqrt{ 2 }}+\frac{\vec{j}}{\sqrt{ 2 }}$
Directional derivative of $f$ with respect to $\vec{u}$ is 
$$\begin{align}
f_{\vec{u}}(0,0) &= \nabla f(0,0)\cdot\vec{u} \\[3pt]
&= \langle f_{x}(0,0), f_{y}(0,0)\rangle \cdot  \vec{u} \\[3pt]
&= \langle 0, 0\rangle \cdot  \vec{ u} = 0 \\[3pt]
f_{u}(0,0) &= \lim_{ h \to 0 }\frac{f\left( 0+\frac{1}{2}h,0+\frac{1}{2}h \right)}{h}
\end{align}$$
> 💡$f$ is differentiable implies partial derivative exist.

However, partial derivative exist doesn't mean $f$ is differentiable.
What additional requirements on partial derivatives do I need?

> If $f_{x}(a,b)$ and $f_{y}(a,b)$ exist, is $f$ continuous at $(a,b)$?

### Example 3
$$f(x,y)=\begin{cases}\displaystyle\frac{x^2y}{x^{2}+y^{2}},&(x,y)\neq(0,0) \\[6pt]
0, &(x,y)=(0,0)
\end{cases}$$
(a) Show that $f_{x}(0,0)$ and $f_{y}(0,0)$ exist
(b) Show that $f$ is not continuous at $(0,0)$
(c) Is $f$ differentiable at $(0, 0)$?

#### Solution
(a) $f_{x}(0,0) = 0$, $f_{y}(0,0)=0$
(b) Check $\displaystyle\lim_{ (x,y) \to(0,0) }\frac{x^2y}{x^2+y^2}=0$?
Along $x=0$, $\displaystyle \lim_{ y \to 0 }\frac{0}{y^2}=0$
Along $y=x^2$, $\displaystyle\lim_{ h \to 0 }\frac{x^2\cdot x^2}{x^4+x^4}=\frac{x^4}{2x^4}=\frac{1}{2}$
Therefore, limit does not exist, and $f$ is discontinuous at $(0,0)$.
(c) If $f$ is discontinuous at $0$, then $f$ is not differentiable at $(0,0)$.

### Theorem
> 💡If partial derivatives exist and are continuous on a small distance around the point $(a,b)$ then $f$ is differentiable at $(a,b)$.

### Example 4
Show $f(x,y)=e^{-(x^2+y^2)}$ is differentiable everywhere.
#### Solution 
$\displaystyle f_{x}(x,y)=e^{-(x^2+y^2)}(-2x)=-\frac{2x}{e^{x^2+y^2}}$
$f_{y}(x,y) = \displaystyle\frac{-2y}{-e^{x^2+y^2}}$
Shows  $f_{x}$ and $f_{y}$ are **continuous** everywhere.
Therefore, $f$ is **differentiable**.
### Example 5
Consider 
$$
f(x)=\begin{cases}\displaystyle
\frac{y^4}{x^{2}+y^{2}},&(x,y)\neq (0,0) \\[6pt]
0, &(x,y)=(0,0)
\end{cases}
$$

Is $f$ differentiable at $(1, 1)$?
#### Solution
Consider $(x,y) \neq (0, 0)$.

$$
\begin{align}
f_{x}(x,y) &= -\frac{2y^4}{(x^2+y^2)^2}\cdot2x=-\frac{4xy}{(x^2+y^2)^2} \\[3pt]
f_{y}(x,y) &= \frac{(x^2+y^2)\cdot4y^2-y^4\cdot2y}{(x^2+y^2)^2}=\frac{2y^5+4y^3x^2}{(x^2+y^2)^2}
\end{align}
$$


**Rational Function** is continuous on its domain, when its denominator $\neq 0$.
- $f_{x}, f_{y}$ are continuous around $(1,1)$
- Since they are rational functions defined on $\mathbb{D}$ i.e. circle of radius $\displaystyle\frac{\sqrt{ 2}}{2}$ with center $(1,1)$.
**Conclusion**: $f$ is differentiable at $(1,1)$ by Theorem 1.
### Summary

1. **Theorem 1** gives sufficient condition for differentiability 
	1.  $f_{x}, f_{y}$ exist at $(x_{0},y_{0})$
	2.  They are continuous on some disk containing $(x_{0}, y_{0})$
	Then $f$ is differentiable at $(x_{0}, y_{0})$.
	
2. To show $f$ is not differentiable
	1. Show function is not continuous at point
	2. Show $f_{x}(a,b)$ or $f_{y}(a,b)$ do not exist using limit definition
	3. Show $f_{\vec{u}}$ is not defined
		a. Pick a direction $\vec{u}$
		b. $f_{\vec{u}}=\nabla f(a,b)\cdot \vec{u}$ and also use limit definition
		c. If both are different, you have a contradiction.

> 💡Note: It is possible for a function to be differentiable and its partial derivatives are not continuous. 

- $f\,(x,y)$ is differentiable on its domain $\implies$ $f\,(x,y)$ is continuous on its domain
-  $f_x$, $f_y$ exist and are continuous at $(a,b)$ $\implies$ $f(x,y)$ is differentiable at $(a,b)$
